src/main/adoc/1-intro/w0-install.adoc, before:

// build_options: 
Java Performance Tuning - Workshop 0
====================================
Arnauld Van Muysewinkel <avm@pendragon.be>
v1.0, 20-Oct-2015: Initial version
:backend: slidy
//:theme: volnitsky
:data-uri:
:copyright: Creative-Commons-Zero (Arnauld Van Muysewinkel)
:icons:
:br: pass:[<br>]


Content
-------

*****
Installing the training toolsuite
*****

* Prerequisites
* Installation
* Verification
* Simple benchmarking

_(link:../0-extra/1-training_plan.html#_workshops[back to course plan])_


Prerequisites
-------------

Installing the kit requires an unzipper (+WinZip+, +7-zip+...).

Using the kit requires one of the following command-line interpreter (CLI):

* preferred: +bash+ (Windows and OSX)
* also supported: +CMD.EXE+ (Windows)

For the next workshops, you will also need:

* a decent browser, with a developer mode (e.g. Google Chrome)
* a cool text editor (programmer friendly, like: VI, SublimeText, Notepad++...)

Installation
------------

* Copy the kit from one of the following locations:
** +\\AVM-PC\Public\JPT+
** https://github.com/arnauldvm/jpt-exercises/blob/master/download.md[GitHub / Dropbox]: jpt-exercises
** USB key
* Choose appropriate platform:
** +jpt-kit-win32-x64.zip+ (269M)
** +jpt-kit-osx.zip+ (99M)
* Extract to your favorite location (e.g. +C:\javadev\jpt+)
* Download the exercices from the same location: +jpt-apps.zip+
* Extract to the same location
* Your install location should look like this:
----
app00/   app01/   local/   setenv.bat   setenv.sh
----


Verification (init)
-------------------

* Start your preferred CLI (bash or CMD) and CD to your install location
* Execute +. setenv.sh+ (bash) or +setenv.bat+ (CMD)
** Your CLI environment is updated

WARNING: This command must be executed each time you start a new CLI!

* A message gives you the list of available tools:

[horizontal]
java:: Oracle Java 8 SDK (runtime, compiler, profiler...)
jmeter _or_ jm:: benchmarking tool
mat:: Memory Analyzer Tool
gcviewer:: Garbage Collector Logs Analyzer
threadlogic:: Threads Dump Analyzer for Weblogic
curl:: HTTP client in CLI mode
perf:: OS resources performance monitoring in CLI mode


Verification (run)
------------------

Verify that each of the following commands brings the expected result:

----
$ java -version
$ javac -version
$ jmeter # launches the JMeter GUI (use "jm" under CMD.EXE)
$ mat # launches the Memory Analyzer Tool
$ threadlogic # launches the Threads Dump Analyzer
$ curl -I http://jira.smals.be # Simple HTTP request
$ perf # Shows system activity metrics every second, hit Ctrl+C to halt
^C
----


Simple benchmarking (launch app)
--------------------------------

* The subdirectory +app00+ contains a very simple webapp
** The webapp echoes the HTTP request headers
* No container is required: built using +com.sun.net.httpserver.HttpServer+ (included in the Oracle JRE)
* Compile the app:
----
$ cd app00
$ ./compile.sh # "compile.bat" under CMD.EXE
----
* Launch the app:
----
$ ./runserver.sh # "runserver.bat" under CMD.EXE
Server is listening on port 7666
----
** Should the port not be free, you can change it by editing the launch script (option +-p<port>+)


Simple benchmarking (verify app)
--------------------------------

* Open a new CLI (remember to execute +. setenv.sh+ or +setenv.bat+)
* Check that the webapp correctly answers to request{br}
_(the exact output may slightly differ depending on your curl version)_:
----
$ curl localhost:7666 # adapt the port number if required
Accept=[*/*]
Host=[localhost:7666]
User-agent=[curl/7.45.0]
----
* Use your browser to navigate to +http://localhost:7666+{br}
and compare the results


Simple benchmarking (jmeter)
----------------------------

* In your second CLI, launch jmeter:
----
$ jmeter # or "jm"
----
* Right-click on "Test Plan" >> Add >> Threads (Users) >> Thread Group
* Right-click on "Thread Group" >> Add >> Sampler >> HTTP Request
* Left-click on "HTTP Request", and key in the following fields:
** Server name or IP: [ localhost ]
** Port Number: [ 7666 ]
* Right-click on "HTTP Request" >> Add >> Listener >> View Results Tree
* Menu "File" >> Save
** Choose an appropriate location and name to save your performance test script (e.g. +src/main/jmeter/app00.jmx+)
* Menu "Run" >> Start
** The test is executed
* Check the response by examining the "View Results Tree" panel

* Terminate the app by hitting Ctrl+C in its CLI windows


That's all folks!
-----------------

[cols="^",grid="none",frame="none"]
|=====
|image:../thats-all-folks.png[link="#(1)"]
|=====

Commit message:

doc(workshop 0): perf on windows may fail if not enough privileges

src/main/adoc/1-intro/w0-install.adoc, after:

// build_options: 
Java Performance Tuning - Workshop 0
====================================
Arnauld Van Muysewinkel <avm@pendragon.be>
v1.0, 20-Oct-2015: Initial version
:backend: slidy
//:theme: volnitsky
:data-uri:
:copyright: Creative-Commons-Zero (Arnauld Van Muysewinkel)
:icons:
:br: pass:[<br>]


Content
-------

*****
Installing the training toolsuite
*****

* Prerequisites
* Installation
* Verification
* Simple benchmarking

_(link:../0-extra/1-training_plan.html#_workshops[back to course plan])_


Prerequisites
-------------

Installing the kit requires an unzipper (+WinZip+, +7-zip+...).

Using the kit requires one of the following command-line interpreter (CLI):

* preferred: +bash+ (Windows and OSX)
* also supported: +CMD.EXE+ (Windows)

For the next workshops, you will also need:

* a decent browser, with a developer mode (e.g. Google Chrome)
* a cool text editor (programmer friendly, like: VI, SublimeText, Notepad++...)

Installation
------------

* Copy the kit from one of the following locations:
** +\\AVM-PC\Public\JPT+
** https://github.com/arnauldvm/jpt-exercises/blob/master/download.md[GitHub / Dropbox]: jpt-exercises
** USB key
* Choose appropriate platform:
** +jpt-kit-win32-x64.zip+ (269M)
** +jpt-kit-osx.zip+ (99M)
* Extract to your favorite location (e.g. +C:\javadev\jpt+)
* Download the exercices from the same location: +jpt-apps.zip+
* Extract to the same location
* Your install location should look like this:
----
app00/   app01/   local/   setenv.bat   setenv.sh
----


Verification (init)
-------------------

* Start your preferred CLI (bash or CMD) and CD to your install location
* Execute +. setenv.sh+ (bash) or +setenv.bat+ (CMD)
** Your CLI environment is updated

WARNING: This command must be executed each time you start a new CLI!

* A message gives you the list of available tools:

[horizontal]
java:: Oracle Java 8 SDK (runtime, compiler, profiler...)
jmeter _or_ jm:: benchmarking tool
mat:: Memory Analyzer Tool
gcviewer:: Garbage Collector Logs Analyzer
threadlogic:: Threads Dump Analyzer for Weblogic
curl:: HTTP client in CLI mode
perf:: OS resources performance monitoring in CLI mode


Verification (run)
------------------

Verify that each of the following commands brings the expected result:

----
$ java -version
$ javac -version
$ jmeter # launches the JMeter GUI (use "jm" under CMD.EXE)
$ mat # launches the Memory Analyzer Tool
$ threadlogic # launches the Threads Dump Analyzer
$ curl -I http://jira.smals.be # Simple HTTP request
$ perf # Shows system activity metrics every second, hit Ctrl+C to halt
$      # (might fail on Windows, depending on your privileges)
^C
----


Simple benchmarking (launch app)
--------------------------------

* The subdirectory +app00+ contains a very simple webapp
** The webapp echoes the HTTP request headers
* No container is required: built using +com.sun.net.httpserver.HttpServer+ (included in the Oracle JRE)
* Compile the app:
----
$ cd app00
$ ./compile.sh # "compile.bat" under CMD.EXE
----
* Launch the app:
----
$ ./runserver.sh # "runserver.bat" under CMD.EXE
Server is listening on port 7666
----
** Should the port not be free, you can change it by editing the launch script (option +-p<port>+)


Simple benchmarking (verify app)
--------------------------------

* Open a new CLI (remember to execute +. setenv.sh+ or +setenv.bat+)
* Check that the webapp correctly answers to request{br}
_(the exact output may slightly differ depending on your curl version)_:
----
$ curl localhost:7666 # adapt the port number if required
Accept=[*/*]
Host=[localhost:7666]
User-agent=[curl/7.45.0]
----
* Use your browser to navigate to +http://localhost:7666+{br}
and compare the results


Simple benchmarking (jmeter)
----------------------------

* In your second CLI, launch jmeter:
----
$ jmeter # or "jm"
----
* Right-click on "Test Plan" >> Add >> Threads (Users) >> Thread Group
* Right-click on "Thread Group" >> Add >> Sampler >> HTTP Request
* Left-click on "HTTP Request", and key in the following fields:
** Server name or IP: [ localhost ]
** Port Number: [ 7666 ]
* Right-click on "HTTP Request" >> Add >> Listener >> View Results Tree
* Menu "File" >> Save
** Choose an appropriate location and name to save your performance test script (e.g. +src/main/jmeter/app00.jmx+)
* Menu "Run" >> Start
** The test is executed
* Check the response by examining the "View Results Tree" panel

* Terminate the app by hitting Ctrl+C in its CLI windows


That's all folks!
-----------------

[cols="^",grid="none",frame="none"]
|=====
|image:../thats-all-folks.png[link="#(1)"]
|=====
