src/main/adoc/2-benchmark/w2-wrapup_benchmark.adoc, before:

// build_options: 
Java Performance Tuning - Workshop 2
====================================
Arnauld Van Muysewinkel <avm@pendragon.be>
v1.0, 25-Oct-2015: Initial version
:backend: slidy
//:theme: volnitsky
:data-uri:
:copyright: Creative-Commons-Zero (Arnauld Van Muysewinkel)
:icons:


Content
-------

*****
Wrapup your performance test
*****

* Assignment
* Requirements
* Steps

_(link:../0-extra/1-training_plan.html#_workshops[back to course plan])_


Assignment
----------

Wrapup the jmeter test, based on given requirements figures

* randomize parameters
* implement several kinds of load profiles


Requirements
------------

* The site receives 16'000'000 search requests per month.
* It is used only during business hours.
// 08-17
* The vast majority of the traffic is concentrated on the first hour of the day.
  (When the developers need to decide which language they want to play with that day.)
// Let's say 100 r/s during one hour accounts for 50% -> 360'000 request during 1h and 720'000 req/day
// => *22 = ~16'000'000 req/month
* Each user makes an average of 3 requests per session.
// Poisson ?
* Moreover, every night, external customers (about 100) run batch jobs executing each between 100'000 and 300'000 requests.
// assumed to start past midnight
// These jobs must be completed before end of night!
// stress test, since jobs are not throttled
// not needed to test the full duration
// (I know that the best throughput is >1000 req/s on Dell laptop)
// -> Assuming there is a window of 6h during the night (01h -> 07h), we can process max 21'600'000 requests,
//    i.e. an average of 216'000 request per customer
* The client wants the site to be fast at any time
// What means fast? E.g. 95% < 1s
// (I know that the response time is very good, how could I make it worse?)


Steps
-----

Randomization

* parameterize (random) users
* parameterize (random) test case parameters

[WARNING]
====
! variable number of requests per session{br}
! variable length of batch jobs
====

Load profiles

* determine (and _write down_) the characteristics of each of your load profiles:{br}
  concurrent users count, number of iterations per session, duration, throughput, response times distribution...
* parameterize thread group parameters
* introduce (parameterized) throughput control
* create one configuration element for each load profile
* quickly test each load profile, and compare the metrics with the expected values.


That's all folks!
-----------------

[cols="^",grid="none",frame="none"]
|=====
|image:../thats-all-folks.png[link="#(1)"]
|=====

Commit message:

doc(workshop 2): write down protocol first

src/main/adoc/2-benchmark/w2-wrapup_benchmark.adoc, after:

// build_options: 
Java Performance Tuning - Workshop 2
====================================
Arnauld Van Muysewinkel <avm@pendragon.be>
v1.0, 25-Oct-2015: Initial version
:backend: slidy
//:theme: volnitsky
:data-uri:
:copyright: Creative-Commons-Zero (Arnauld Van Muysewinkel)
:icons:


Content
-------

*****
Wrapup your performance test
*****

* Assignment
* Requirements
* Steps

_(link:../0-extra/1-training_plan.html#_workshops[back to course plan])_


Assignment
----------

Wrapup the jmeter test, based on given requirements figures

* randomize parameters
* implement several kinds of load profiles

[WARNING]
=====
1° Write down your (simplified) test protocol

2° _When the protocol is OK_, start implementing it
=====

Requirements
------------

* The site receives 16'000'000 search requests per month.
* It is used only during business hours.
// 08-17
* The vast majority of the traffic is concentrated on the first hour of the day.
  (When the developers need to decide which language they want to play with that day.)
// Let's say 100 r/s during one hour accounts for 50% -> 360'000 request during 1h and 720'000 req/day
// => *22 = ~16'000'000 req/month
* Each user makes an average of 3 requests per session.
// Poisson ?
* Moreover, every night, external customers (about 100) run batch jobs executing each between 100'000 and 300'000 requests.
// assumed to start past midnight
// These jobs must be completed before end of night!
// stress test, since jobs are not throttled
// not needed to test the full duration
// (I know that the best throughput is >1000 req/s on Dell laptop)
// -> Assuming there is a window of 6h during the night (01h -> 07h), we can process max 21'600'000 requests,
//    i.e. an average of 216'000 request per customer
* The client wants the site to be fast at any time
// What means fast? E.g. 95% < 1s
// (I know that the response time is very good, how could I make it worse?)


Steps
-----

Randomization

* parameterize (random) users
* parameterize (random) test case parameters

[WARNING]
====
! variable number of requests per session{br}
! variable length of batch jobs
====

Load profiles

* determine (and _write down_) the characteristics of each of your load profiles:{br}
  concurrent users count, number of iterations per session, duration, throughput, response times distribution...
* parameterize thread group parameters
* introduce (parameterized) throughput control
* create one configuration element for each load profile
* quickly test each load profile, and compare the metrics with the expected values.


That's all folks!
-----------------

[cols="^",grid="none",frame="none"]
|=====
|image:../thats-all-folks.png[link="#(1)"]
|=====
