src/main/adoc/3-pdm/1-pdm_l1-os.adoc, before:

// build_options: 
Java Performance Tuning - PDM Layer 1: Operating System
=======================================================
Arnauld Van Muysewinkel <avm@pendragon.be>
v0.1, 27-Oct-2015: Initial version
:backend: slidy
//:theme: volnitsky
:data-uri:
:copyright: Creative-Commons-Zero (Arnauld Van Muysewinkel)
:icons:
:pdm-width: 25%
:tabletags-blue.bodydata: <td style="background-color:skyblue;text-align:center">|</td>
:tabledef-default.blue-style: tags="blue"


Content
-------

* Usual causes
* No dominant consumer
* Metrics
* Monitoring tools
* Case studies

_(link:../0-extra/1-training_plan.html#_presentations[back to course plan])_


Dominant Consumer: OS
---------------------

[width="{pdm-width}", halign="center", float="right"]
|===========
| Actors
| Application
| Java VM
b| OS (Hardware)
|===========

Usual causes::
* excessive context switching
** lock contention?
* Disk I/O
* Network I/O

If OS spends time managing access to resources, there will be more CPU system time than usual.

IMPORTANT: *Symptom* +
Proportion of CPU system time vs. user time is too high.


Dominant Consumer: "None"
-------------------------

Usual causes::
* slow I/O
* synchronous calls to slow external systems
* over worked connection or thread pool
* faulty, misconfigured or otherwise slow hardware network/disk
** DNS

_+ Make sure there is enough load on the system!_

IMPORTANT: *Symptom* +
Low CPU usage and no system CPU time


Important metrics
-----------------

[horizontal]
Load / Run queue size:: (cf. +vmstat+) count of the number of process using or waiting for CPU 
Load Average:: (cf. +top+) average size of the run queue over a period of time +
 -> last 1, 5, and 15 minutes
CPU Idle:: amount of time the CPU isn't used by any process +
 => +Total CPU usage = 100% - idle+
CPU System:: time spent by the CPU executing kernel code
CPU User:: time spent by the CPU executing user (application) code
Context switches:: counts how many times the CPU has switched from one thread to another, per second
Interrupts:: number of interrupt, including clock, per second


Resources consumption monitoring: vmstat
----------------------------------------

[source,sh]
----
> vmstat [delay_in_sec [count]]
----
On Linux +
image:images/vmstat_linux.png[width=630,align="left"] +
On Solaris +
image:images/vmstat_solaris.png[width=600,align="left"]

CAUTION: First line shows consolidate data since boot time +
Each next line covers one interval of time (delay_in_sec)


Resources consumption monitoring: top
-------------------------------------

[source,sh]
----
> top ...
----
On U*X +
image:images/top_osx.png[width="700",align="left"]

[source,sh]
----
> w ...
----
On U*X +
image:images/w_osx.png[width="700",align="left"]


Resources consumption monitoring: Perfmon
-----------------------------------------

Windows command line:
[source,sh]
----
> typeperf metric metric ...
----

GUI: +
image:images/PerfMon_windows-crop.png[width="700", align="center"]
// some strange behavior with image conversion inside asciidoc(/libpng)
// tried to re-save, convert (GIF,JPG), resize, re-snapshot ... the initial image, but to no avail
// only this re-snapshot+cropped version is finally working, by chanche


Resources consumption monitoring: Perfmon
-----------------------------------------

IMPORTANT: Some metrics require Admin privilege!

Interesting metrics:

* \\System\\Processor Queue Length
* \\Processor(_Total)\\%% Interrupt Time
* \\Processor(_Total)\\%% User Time
* \\Processor(_Total)\\%% Privileged Time
* \\System\\File Read Bytes/sec
* \\System\\File Write Bytes/sec


Threads dump
------------

* Identify threads bottlenecks
* Determine what threads are doing.
* Cheap to produce: no impact on performance

* Analyse the file with ThreadLogic (also gives specific hints in case of a WebLogic dump)


Threads dump
------------

To generate a heap dump:

* Find the PID of the JVM
[source,sh]
----
> ps -A | grep java
----

* Send the order to the JVM
[source,sh]
----
> jstack PID > threadsdump.tdump
or
> kill -3 PID
----
(in the latter case, the thread dump is sent to the stdout of the java process)


Case studies: CPU bottleneck
----------------------------

image:images/vmstat_sample_r.png[align="left"]

IMPORTANT: *Symptoms* +
+r >> 2 * # CPU+ (4 in this case)

TIP: *Resolution* +
- add more CPU +
- or optimize algorithm (e.g. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strength_reduction[strength reduction])


Case studies: starvation
------------------------

image:images/vmstat_sample_cs.png[align="left"]

IMPORTANT: *Symptoms* +
+cs high and CPU low+ -> Lots of context switching +
=> threads don't consume their alloted time quantum

TIP: *Resolution* +
find what's blocking threads progress: livelocks, I/O, network 


Case studies: Dominant OS
-------------------------

image:images/vmstat_sample_us-sy.png[align="left"]

IMPORTANT: *Symptoms* +
+sy > us ÷ 10+ -> OS activity dominates

TIP: *Resolution* +
- high cs -> lock contention? +
- I/O? (disk or network)

Commit message:

fix(code blocks): avoid misleading notation PID, replace by {pid} + explaining comment

src/main/adoc/3-pdm/1-pdm_l1-os.adoc, after:

// build_options: 
Java Performance Tuning - PDM Layer 1: Operating System
=======================================================
Arnauld Van Muysewinkel <avm@pendragon.be>
v0.2, 17-Nov-2015: Initial version, with small corrections
:backend: slidy
//:theme: volnitsky
:data-uri:
:copyright: Creative-Commons-Zero (Arnauld Van Muysewinkel)
:icons:
:pdm-width: 25%
:tabletags-blue.bodydata: <td style="background-color:skyblue;text-align:center">|</td>
:tabledef-default.blue-style: tags="blue"


Content
-------

* Usual causes
* No dominant consumer
* Metrics
* Monitoring tools
* Case studies

_(link:../0-extra/1-training_plan.html#_presentations[back to course plan])_


Dominant Consumer: OS
---------------------

[width="{pdm-width}", halign="center", float="right"]
|===========
| Actors
| Application
| Java VM
b| OS (Hardware)
|===========

Usual causes::
* excessive context switching
** lock contention?
* Disk I/O
* Network I/O

If OS spends time managing access to resources, there will be more CPU system time than usual.

IMPORTANT: *Symptom* +
Proportion of CPU system time vs. user time is too high.


Dominant Consumer: "None"
-------------------------

Usual causes::
* slow I/O
* synchronous calls to slow external systems
* over worked connection or thread pool
* faulty, misconfigured or otherwise slow hardware network/disk
** DNS

_+ Make sure there is enough load on the system!_

IMPORTANT: *Symptom* +
Low CPU usage and no system CPU time


Important metrics
-----------------

[horizontal]
Load / Run queue size:: (cf. +vmstat+) count of the number of process using or waiting for CPU 
Load Average:: (cf. +top+) average size of the run queue over a period of time +
 -> last 1, 5, and 15 minutes
CPU Idle:: amount of time the CPU isn't used by any process +
 => +Total CPU usage = 100% - idle+
CPU System:: time spent by the CPU executing kernel code
CPU User:: time spent by the CPU executing user (application) code
Context switches:: counts how many times the CPU has switched from one thread to another, per second
Interrupts:: number of interrupt, including clock, per second


Resources consumption monitoring: vmstat
----------------------------------------

[source,sh]
----
> vmstat [delay_in_sec [count]]
----
On Linux +
image:images/vmstat_linux.png[width=630,align="left"] +
On Solaris +
image:images/vmstat_solaris.png[width=600,align="left"]

CAUTION: First line shows consolidate data since boot time +
Each next line covers one interval of time (delay_in_sec)


Resources consumption monitoring: top
-------------------------------------

[source,sh]
----
> top ...
----
On U*X +
image:images/top_osx.png[width="700",align="left"]

[source,sh]
----
> w ...
----
On U*X +
image:images/w_osx.png[width="700",align="left"]


Resources consumption monitoring: Perfmon
-----------------------------------------

Windows command line:
[source,sh]
----
> typeperf metric metric ...
----

GUI: +
image:images/PerfMon_windows-crop.png[width="700", align="center"]
// some strange behavior with image conversion inside asciidoc(/libpng)
// tried to re-save, convert (GIF,JPG), resize, re-snapshot ... the initial image, but to no avail
// only this re-snapshot+cropped version is finally working, by chanche


Resources consumption monitoring: Perfmon
-----------------------------------------

IMPORTANT: Some metrics require Admin privilege!

Interesting metrics:

* \\System\\Processor Queue Length
* \\Processor(_Total)\\%% Interrupt Time
* \\Processor(_Total)\\%% User Time
* \\Processor(_Total)\\%% Privileged Time
* \\System\\File Read Bytes/sec
* \\System\\File Write Bytes/sec


Threads dump
------------

* Identify threads bottlenecks
* Determine what threads are doing.
* Cheap to produce: no impact on performance

* Analyse the file with ThreadLogic (also gives specific hints in case of a WebLogic dump)


Threads dump
------------

To generate a heap dump:

* Find the PID of the JVM
[source,sh]
----
> ps -A | grep java
----

* Send the order to the JVM
[source,sh]
----
> jstack {pid} > threadsdump.tdump # replace {pid} by the found PID
or
> kill -3 {pid} # replace {pid} by the found PID
----
(in the latter case, the thread dump is sent to the stdout of the java process)


Case studies: CPU bottleneck
----------------------------

image:images/vmstat_sample_r.png[align="left"]

IMPORTANT: *Symptoms* +
+r >> 2 * # CPU+ (4 in this case)

TIP: *Resolution* +
- add more CPU +
- or optimize algorithm (e.g. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strength_reduction[strength reduction])


Case studies: starvation
------------------------

image:images/vmstat_sample_cs.png[align="left"]

IMPORTANT: *Symptoms* +
+cs high and CPU low+ -> Lots of context switching +
=> threads don't consume their alloted time quantum

TIP: *Resolution* +
find what's blocking threads progress: livelocks, I/O, network 


Case studies: Dominant OS
-------------------------

image:images/vmstat_sample_us-sy.png[align="left"]

IMPORTANT: *Symptoms* +
+sy > us ÷ 10+ -> OS activity dominates

TIP: *Resolution* +
- high cs -> lock contention? +
- I/O? (disk or network)
