src/main/adoc/4-process/0-perf_test_process.adoc, before:

// build_options: 
Java Performance Tuning - Performance Testing Process
=====================================================
Arnauld Van Muysewinkel <avm@pendragon.be>
v0.1, 28-Oct-2015: Initial version
:backend: slidy
//:theme: volnitsky
:data-uri:
:copyright: Creative-Commons-Zero (Arnauld Van Muysewinkel)


Content
-------

* <<_rtri_documentation,Documentation>>
* <<_rtri_process,Process>>
* <<_rtri_process_smals,Process for SIC@Smals>>
** Steps
// (p16)
//** Plan
// (p18,19),
** Mission Sheet

_(link:../0-extra/1-training_plan.html#_presentations[back to course plan])_


&rtri; Documentation
--------------------

* Architecture document of the UoT
* Test plan:
** goals
** scope (boundaries of the UoT)
** resources required (! including key people for running the test or for solving issues)
** schedulling
* Requirements: performance goals
* Test data: input data for the test scenario (! quantity and randomization)
* Test protocol: process, scenarios, load profiles...
* Test report:
** all results (measures and calculations)
** conclusions


&rtri; Process
--------------

* quality of inputs is key:
** precise requirements
** quantity and randomization of input data
** objective and well defined scope
* iterative process
** design
** test
** analyse
** fix


&rtri; Process @ Smals
----------------------

* [Project] Prepare Mission Sheet (V1)
* Send V1 to SIC -> schedule KOM
* [Project+SIC] KOM
** Agree on the high level design of the test protocol (scenarios, load profiles...)
* LOOP
** [Project] Complete Mission Sheet (V2)
*** Final artifacts
*** Complete set of input data
*** Complete set of users (attributes...)
** [SIC] Prepare test environment
*** [Project] Support
*** [Middleware] Support
** [SIC] Detailed test protocol
*** [Project] Support
** [SIC] Prepare test harness (jmeter scripts, SOAP clients, jenkins configuration...)
*** [Project] Support
** [SIC] Run test
** [SIC] Analyse results
** [SIC+Project] discuss results
** ITERATE
* [SIC] Prepare report
** [Project] Review report
* [SIC] Publish report


Mission Sheet
-------------

See template in https://github.com/arnauldvm/jpt-course/tree/master/data/docs[data/docs] in git repo


That's all folks!
-----------------

[cols="^",grid="none",frame="none"]
|=====
|image:../thats-all-folks.png[link="#(1)"]
|=====

Commit message:

fix(process): see legacy reference protocol in data/docs

src/main/adoc/4-process/0-perf_test_process.adoc, after:

// build_options: 
Java Performance Tuning - Performance Testing Process
=====================================================
Arnauld Van Muysewinkel <avm@pendragon.be>
v0.1, 28-Oct-2015: Initial version
:backend: slidy
//:theme: volnitsky
:data-uri:
:copyright: Creative-Commons-Zero (Arnauld Van Muysewinkel)


Content
-------

* <<_rtri_documentation,Documentation>>
* <<_rtri_process,Process>>
* <<_rtri_process_smals,Process for SIC@Smals>>
** Steps
// (p16)
//** Plan
// (p18,19),
** Mission Sheet

_(link:../0-extra/1-training_plan.html#_presentations[back to course plan])_


&rtri; Documentation
--------------------

* Architecture document of the UoT
* Test plan:
** goals
** scope (boundaries of the UoT)
** resources required (! including key people for running the test or for solving issues)
** schedulling
* Requirements: performance goals
* Test data: input data for the test scenario (! quantity and randomization)
* Test protocol: process, scenarios, load profiles...
* Test report:
** all results (measures and calculations)
** conclusions


&rtri; Process
--------------

* quality of inputs is key:
** precise requirements
** quantity and randomization of input data
** objective and well defined scope
* iterative process
** design
** test
** analyse
** fix


&rtri; Process @ Smals
----------------------

* [Project] Prepare Mission Sheet (V1)
* Send V1 to SIC -> schedule KOM
* [Project+SIC] KOM
** Agree on the high level design of the test protocol (scenarios, load profiles...)
* LOOP
** [Project] Complete Mission Sheet (V2)
*** Final artifacts
*** Complete set of input data
*** Complete set of users (attributes...)
** [SIC] Prepare test environment
*** [Project] Support
*** [Middleware] Support
** [SIC] Detailed test protocol
*** [Project] Support
** [SIC] Prepare test harness (jmeter scripts, SOAP clients, jenkins configuration...)
*** [Project] Support
** [SIC] Run test
** [SIC] Analyse results
** [SIC+Project] discuss results
** ITERATE
* [SIC] Prepare report
** [Project] Review report
* [SIC] Publish report


Mission Sheet
-------------

See template in https://github.com/arnauldvm/jpt-course/tree/master/data/docs[data/docs] in git repo


Protocol
--------

See legacy reference protocol in https://github.com/arnauldvm/jpt-course/tree/master/data/docs[data/docs] in git repo


That's all folks!
-----------------

[cols="^",grid="none",frame="none"]
|=====
|image:../thats-all-folks.png[link="#(1)"]
|=====
